[OEP 4084] add oep for thinpool based scheduling (#4083)
openebs/openebs: designs/local-pv/lvm/thinpool-based-scheduling.md

---
oep-number: OEP 4084
title: OpenEBS Enhancement Proposal for ThinPool based Scheduling
authors:
  - "@abhilashshetty04"
owners:
  - "@abhilashshetty04"
editor: TBD
creation-date: 2025-10-10
last-updated: 2025-10-10
status: provisional
---

# OpenEBS Enhancement Proposal for ThinPool based Scheduling

## Table of Contents

1. [Overview](#overview)
2. [Motivation](#motivation)
3. [Goals](#goals)
4. [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
5. [Proposal](#proposal)
6. [User Stories](#user-stories)
7. [Implementation Details](#implementation-details)
8. [Testing](#testing)

---

## Overview

This proposal introduces ThinPool in VolumeGroup object. VolumeGroups ([]VolumeGroup) is part of lvmnode crd definition. This will be used for making scheduling decision of thin PVC.

## Motivation

> - LocalPV LVM creates thinpool LV (thick from the VG allocation perspective) on the VG to hold thin LVs. When a thin LV is scheduled on a VG. If VG does not have thinpool LV its created by the node plugin before creating thin LV. With capacity monitoring enabled, the thinpool is extended as more PE is allocated to LVs. We don't down size thinpool when thin LV gets removed. We just destroy the thinpool when the last thin LV is removed.

Reviewer: nit: very long sentences aren't very easy to read in the rendered markdown

> - LocalPV LVM creates thinpool LV (thick from the VG allocation perspective) on the VG to hold thin LVs. When a thin LV is scheduled on a VG. If VG does not have thinpool LV its created by the node plugin before creating thin LV. With capacity monitoring enabled, the thinpool is extended as more PE is allocated to LVs. We don't down size thinpool when thin LV gets removed. We just destroy the thinpool when the last thin LV is removed.

Reviewer 2: Please add terminology section for terms like LV, PE, VG, CR, CRD etc

- OpenEBS takes care of thinpool lifecycle. However, We have seen users creating a thinpool spanning the VG size beforehand. In this scenario the whole VG is configured to schedule thin LVs. Without having thinpool LV stats scheduler might not know if thin LV can be accommodated by the VG it shows no free space.
- We have received several user issues.
  [User Issue](https://github.com/openebs/lvm-localpv/issues/382)

>   [User Issue](https://github.com/openebs/lvm-localpv/issues/356)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- OpenEBS takes care of thinpool lifecycle. However, we have seen users creating a thinpool spanning the VG size beforehand. In this scenario the whole VG is configured to schedule thin LVs. Without having thinpool LV stats scheduler might not know if thin LV can be accommodated by the VG it shows no free space.
- We have received several user issues:
  - [lvm-localpv/issues/382](https://github.com/openebs/lvm-localpv/issues/382)
  - [lvm-localpv/issues/356](https://github.com/openebs/lvm-localpv/issues/356)
```

## Goals

- Add thinpool LV in the VolumeGroup struct of lvmnode CR.

> - Populate []ThinPool on lvmnode if VG has thinpool in it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Update the LVMNode’s []ThinPool field when a VG includes a thin pool.
```

- Evaluate thinpool and VG capacity before scheduling thin LV.

> - Use PVC size while making scheduling decision. We don't use PVC size as of now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use PVC size for scheduling decisions, as it’s currently not factored in.
```

## Non-Goals

- Resizing down thinpool on each thin LV destroy.
- As of now, User have to provide either of vgPatten or volGroup parameter in SC. We will implement this feature by honoring this restriction. However, in upcoming task we would like to remove this restriction by making it optional.

> - Changes on thick volume scheduling.

Reviewer: but will still need to consider that thinpool is taking up space right?

Author: Even if we know that there is a thinpool taking up space we can't do anything right? We are not going to downsize it even if it doesn't have higher allocation. We remove thinpool only when last lv is getting removed from it.

For the thick PVC scheduling we will need enough free space on VG.

  - It can happen that thinpool might be nearing its capacity but that’s okay if VG has enough enough space for thinpool expand to work. In such case we can prefer VG having higher free space.

## User Stories

1. **Story 1**:
  As a System Administrator, I want thin pvc to get scheduled optimally. I want scheduler to use thinpool and VG capacity to to select VG for lvmvolume CR.

## Implementation Details

### Design

- **LVMNode CRD change**:
  ```
  type LVMNode struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
    VolumeGroups []VolumeGroup `json:"volumeGroups"`
  }
  ```

  Adding a new field here. Its optional, So won't be a breaking change during upgrade from older to this CRD.

  ```
  type VolumeGroup struct {
    ...
    // ThinPools hosted by the volume group.
    ThinPools []ThinPool `json:"thinPools,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

  ```
  type ThinPool struct {
    // Name of the thinpool lv.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    Name string `json:"name"`
    // Size of the thinpool lv, in bytes.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required

>     Size int64 `json:"size"`

Reviewer: use quantity, ex like [here](https://github.com/openebs/lvm-localpv/blob/f103ba5e3fa2521a3bc3e6e9c53608942b950b5d/pkg/apis/openebs.io/lvm/v1alpha1/lvmnode.go#L55).

Author: There is some limitations with resource module of apimachinery. Here is an example:

```
vgs --options vg_all --reportformat json --units b
  {
      "report": [
          {
              "vg": [
                  {"vg_fmt":"lvm2", "vg_uuid":"LiSueL-WzLV-OD7d-IWuq-c9Jk-70yP-ZhxqAd", "vg_name":"lvmvg", "vg_attr":"wz--n-", "vg_permissions":"writeable", "vg_extendable":"extendable", "vg_exported":"", "vg_partial":"", "vg_allocation_policy":"normal", "vg_clustered":"", "vg_shared":"", "vg_size":"85895151616B", "vg_free":"1975517184B", "vg_sysid":"", "vg_systemid":"", "vg_lock_type":"", "vg_lock_args":"", "vg_extent_size":"4194304B", "vg_extent_count":"20479", "vg_free_count":"471", "max_lv":"0", "max_pv":"0", "pv_count":"1", "vg_missing_pv_count":"0", "lv_count":"3", "snap_count":"0", "vg_seqno":"29", "vg_tags":"", "vg_profile":"", "vg_mda_count":"1", "vg_mda_used_count":"1", "vg_mda_free":"**518144B**", "vg_mda_size":"1044480B", "vg_mda_copies":"unmanaged"},
                  {"vg_fmt":"lvm2", "vg_uuid":"Ee4l3D-7gQ3-oNHX-oGeD-ZDp2-N0Or-OU2wCz", "vg_name":"lvmvg-1", "vg_attr":"wz--n-", "vg_permissions":"writeable", "vg_extendable":"extendable", "vg_exported":"", "vg_partial":"", "vg_allocation_policy":"normal", "vg_clustered":"", "vg_shared":"", "vg_size":"64420315136B", "vg_free":"21445476352B", "vg_sysid":"", "vg_systemid":"", "vg_lock_type":"", "vg_lock_args":"", "vg_extent_size":"4194304B", "vg_extent_count":"15359", "vg_free_count":"5113", "max_lv":"0", "max_pv":"0", "pv_count":"1", "vg_missing_pv_count":"0", "lv_count":"3", "snap_count":"0", "vg_seqno":"7", "vg_tags":"", "vg_profile":"", "vg_mda_count":"1", "vg_mda_used_count":"1", "vg_mda_free":"**518656B**", "vg_mda_size":"1044480B", "vg_mda_copies":"unmanaged"}
              ]
          }
      ]
  }
➜  lvm-localpv git:(track_thinpool_usage) ✗ kubectl get lvmnodes -n lvm -oyaml
apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: local.openebs.io/v1alpha1
  kind: LVMNode
  metadata:
    creationTimestamp: "2025-10-14T09:10:34Z"
    generation: 1
    name: ubuntu-32gb-fsn1-1-abhilash
    namespace: lvm
    ownerReferences:
    - apiVersion: v1
      controller: true
      kind: Node
      name: ubuntu-32gb-fsn1-1-abhilash
      uid: 5c15488e-70d7-4a7f-abc5-bd4a21b51910
    resourceVersion: "884"
    uid: 972b4e50-10c5-46c1-8f9a-0637f797f8a6
  volumeGroups:
  - allocationPolicy: 0
    free: 1884Mi
    lvCount: 3
    maxLv: 0
    maxPv: 0
    metadataCount: 1
    **metadataFree: 506Ki**
    metadataSize: 1020Ki
    metadataUsedCount: 1
    missingPvCount: 0
    name: lvmvg
    permissions: 0
    pvCount: 1
    size: 81916Mi
    snapCount: 0
    thinPools:
    - free: 81624565003
      name: lvmvg_thinpool
      size: 83751862272
    uuid: LiSueL-WzLV-OD7d-IWuq-c9Jk-70yP-ZhxqAd
  - allocationPolicy: 0
    free: 20452Mi
    lvCount: 3
    maxLv: 0
    maxPv: 0
    metadataCount: 1
    **metadataFree: "518656"**
    metadataSize: 1020Ki
    metadataUsedCount: 1
    missingPvCount: 0
    name: lvmvg-1
    permissions: 0
    pvCount: 1
    size: 61436Mi
    snapCount: 0
    thinPools:
    - free: 10737418240
      name: thin_lv
      size: 10737418240
    uuid: Ee4l3D-7gQ3-oNHX-oGeD-ZDp2-N0Or-OU2wCz
kind: List
metadata:
  resourceVersion: ""
```
It doesn't seem to convert bytes to Binary format if binary format results in a decimal value.

lvmvg has vg_md_free 518144B which is 506KiB. So the conversion works fine and CR has 506Ki. lvmvg-1 has vg_md_free as 518656 which is 506.5KiB. This doesn't convert. The value is as is in the CR.

I had raised a issue in l`ocalpv-zfs` regarding this while working on openebs plugin

https://github.com/openebs/zfs-localpv/issues/621

These value will be inconsistently represented in Thinpool stats as `free` will mostly have decimal binary values. Better we keep it consistent and represent in bytes.

    // Free capacity of thinpool, in bytes.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    Free int64 `json:"free"`
  }
  ```

- **Changes in Scheduler**:
  - For thin PVC:
    - Scheduler will check if the VG has enough space to host the LV. If it does, then we don't need to check anything else. If it doesn't, check if there is a thinpool in the VG which can accommodate the LV. If thinpool is nearing capacity then better not to schedule there.
    - It can happen that thinpool might be nearing its capacity but that’s okay if VG has enough enough space for thinpool expand to work. In such case we can prefer VG having higher free space. As that has better chance of auto expand to work if configured.
  - For thick PVC:
    - No changes for thick PVC

> ### Components to Update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Components to Update

```

- **LvmNode CRD**: Add []thinpool in VolumeGroup.
- **Node agent**: Add logic to fetch and update thinpools for a VolumeGroup.
- **Controller**: Modify scheduler to use thinpool spec while scheduling thin PVC.
- **OpenEBS Plugin**: Add thinpool details in volume-groups response.

> ## Testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Testing

```

> - Validate thinpools getting populated

Reviewer: Also need to test it's being taken into account right?

Author: Added a test that will validate it. We need a multi node setup to test this change in automation.
